[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> The Templars in Brazil.
This is the story of
Dr. Kathleen Ball,
researcher, traveler, and
explorer of ancient sites
and her discovery of a cave--
>> Woo!
>> --a cave hidden in a
remote area on the outskirts
of a small Brazilian town,
a cave that was carved
by the Knights Templar.
We will explore how
this adventure began
and the little-known history
of the Templars' travels
to Brazil.
What were their reasons
for coming to South America
two centuries before Columbus
sailed to the new world?
We'll also investigate
the Templars' agenda.
What goals did they have
for medieval society?
And we'll find out how
Kathleen Ball's exploration
of a dungeon in Domme, France,
where many Templars were
imprisoned in the
early 14th century,
sheds light on her life-altering
and history-changing discovery.
>> My name is Kathleen Ball,
and I'm here in Alto Paraíso
Brazil.
And this is my third trip here,
and we have been on the hunt
for history relating
to the Templars.
>> August 2015.
During a hiking trip through
Brazil with a friend,
Adele Goode, Kathleen visits
the tiny town of Alto Paraíso.
She chances upon an
exquisite, secluded area
in the Chapada National Park.
Surrounded by
breathtaking waterfalls
and unique megalithic
rock formations,
it feels like a
place out of time.
There, the unspoiled natural
beauty of the landscape
mirrors the quiet dignity and
uncomplicated lifestyle enjoyed
by the local population.
Charmed, Kathleen
and Adele decide
to rent rooms in a local inn, or
posada, and explore the region.
On a hike to Agua Fria, a
waterfall some five miles
outside of town, a
local man tells them
about something unusual
on an adjacent property.
[WATER RUSHING]
He describes a vein
of quartz crystal rock
two feet wide and stretching
across the landscape
for roughly two miles.
He asks the women if they
would like to see it.
Both Kathleen and Adele agree
that it sounds intriguing,
and they set off.
Neither has any idea
that they are soon
to make an extraordinary
discovery, one that
will forever transform history's
understanding of the Knights
Templar.
Kathleen and Adele follow
the vein of crystal for some
distance, eventually arriving
at a humble-looking cave nestled
into a nondescript hillside
outside of Alto Paraíso.
There, carved into
the cave wall,
Kathleen spots an engraving.
Unbelievably, it's a
distinctive Templar cross.
The cross is
striking to Kathleen
for a number of reasons, but
foremost among them is the fact
that the carving is
here in the first place.
After all, Kathleen
is thousands of miles
and an ocean away
from other Templar
crosses that she's seen
and studied in France.
Recognizing the potential
gravity of her finding,
Kathleen hastily takes several
pictures of the carving.
After she and Adele
return to their posada,
Kathleen decides that she
must dig deeper and explore
any potential links between
this carving in Brazil
and those in France.
But before she
leaves Alto Paraíso,
she also conducts a short
interview with Liomar,
a local resident
and their guide.
>> The slaves back then would
pan the crystals here and bring
them over to the
cavern to bless it.
And this is where they
would do the benzene,
at the cave temple.
Old times, the
times of the slaves,
the blacks and the time of
the quiolombola settlement.
>> Ah.
>> [SPEAKING PORTUGUESE]
>> OK.
>> Perfecto.
>> Kathleen's immediate
recognition of the importance
of the Templar cross carved into
a cave wall near Alto Paraíso,
Brazil is rooted in a trip
she made to France six years
before.
In May of 2009, she visited
the fortified medieval town
of Domme in the Dordogne area.
She explored the little-known
and badly deteriorated dungeons
of the ancient town.
This is where hundreds
of Templar Knights
had been imprisoned by King
Phillip IV of France in 1307.
And there, on the dungeon walls,
were the remains of graffiti
carved by the jailed knights.
Doomed by the king to torture
and eventual execution,
they left behind numerous
glyphs of Templar crosses
indicative of their era.
During her visit, Kathleen
photographed these glyphs.
>> During my trip in
2009 to Domme, France,
my husband and I-- we had
gone there originally to see
the Grotto, which is an
underground cave system.
After we came up,
the representative
from the office of
tourism asked us
if we were interested
in seeing the dungeons
where the Templars were
housed when they were
held by King Philip the Fair.
So he walked us over
there, gave me the key,
and said that we could spend
as much time as we liked.
And so I photographed
everything.
[CAMERA CLICKING]
I photographed all the
crosses and the graffiti
and just spent about
an hour in the space.
So when we were done, I took the
key back to the representative
there and asked him who actually
carved the glyphs there.
And he said that they
were done by the Templars
while they were
awaiting their death.
And I asked him, well,
what do these symbols mean?
There was a lot
of small figures--
men, male figures, it
appeared to be, with crosses
above their heads, and just
several crosses throughout,
all over on the walls.
And he said, well, the Templars
were a religious order,
and he believed them
to be religious glyphs.
And I had no idea that
six years later, in 2015,
that I was going to be traveling
to Brazil and find a cave--
>> Woo!
>> --with a cross that was very
similar to these that I found
in Domme, France.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
Seven years later, as she
leaves Brazil in 2015,
questions flood Kathleen's
mind about the relationship
between the glyphs in France
and the carving in Brazil.
What she already knows is this--
several hundred Templars,
including their grand master,
Jacques de Molay, were
imprisoned and murdered,
many in Domme itself.
This, combined with
the earlier fall
of their stronghold of Acre
in the Holy Land and abolition
of their order by
papal bull in 1312,
led the surviving Templars
to take drastic measures.
These seismic events
forced the Templars
to seek a place where
they could carry out
their mission in safety.
So they reorganized
themselves in Portugal.
But might some
Templars have found
it necessary to leave
Europe entirely?
>> They had gone as far West
as they could in Europe.
There was nowhere
else to go but water.
And one of the main reasons
that I think they left so early
was that they were
maybe even somewhat
desperate to recreate what
they'd created in Portugal,
which they could see was going
to be destroyed at some point.
The church was coming in.
They had threatened all
the other monarchies
throughout Europe that if they
didn't disband the Templars
and didn't take
their properties,
they would be excommunicated.
There was a tremendous
amount of pressure.
And so what did they do?
I believe, at that time, with
the blessing of King Denis,
I believe that they
left Portugal--
they had the fleets, they had
the money, they had the men,
and they certainly
had the motivation--
left to Brazil and colonized
the area in Alto Paraíso,
which is where I found the cave.
>> Could they have departed
from Portugal and made their way
to South America and to that
tiny cave outside of Alto
Paraíso?
And if so, how did they do it?
>> While they were
in the Holy Land,
there is a great deal of
speculation that they had
obtained the maps, boat-building
skills, to be able to travel.
And I believe that it was
at this time, some time
in, possibly, even, the
late 1200s and early 1300s,
that they took off and
traveled to South America.
>> Before exploring the
possibility of the Knights
Templar reaching Brazil, it
would be useful to know when
and why the order was created.
However, as is often the
case with the Templars,
even the most basic details
of the order's foundation
are shrouded in mystery.
[INTENSE MUSIC]
[VOCALIZING]
>> It's difficult for historians
either to determine the exact
date that the order was created
or to establish the true reason
for its coming into being.
One version of
their founding holds
that the Knights
Templar were established
in 1118 by Pope Urban II.
Their mission was
to protect pilgrims
traveling to the Holy Land.
>> Officially, it was created in
1118 and sanctioned by the pope
in 1139 AD.
Why they were created
is, wow, there's
a great deal of speculation
surrounding that.
The accepted reason
that they were created
was to accompany
pilgrims to the Holy Land
and also to fight
in the Crusades.
However, it doesn't
seem very likely
that they were going
to be able to fend off
enemies that were trying to
kill thousands of pilgrims.
It just doesn't
seem very likely.
My belief is that
they were there
to excavate under the temple,
under the stables, which
is where they were
given that property.
And this is where they built
their stronghold while they
were there in the Holy Land.
It was right above
the Temple Mount.
>> Yet documents from the
time indicate that the order
consisted of just 11 Knights.
The notion that such a
small group of individuals
would be tasked with protecting
thousands of pilgrims
strikes many today as unlikely.
>> After the First Crusade
was launched in 1096,
the Frenchman Godfrey de
Bouillon and many other knights
defended Christendom
by attacking the Turks
in Constantinople and Anatolia.
Three years later, they
achieved their major aim,
the recapture of the Holy
City of Jerusalem in 1099.
So were they the
original Templars?
Whatever the circumstances
of the order's founding,
by the 12th century,
the Knights Templar
were present in the Holy Land.
Their task was to defend
it for the Church of Rome.
The new order of
the Knights Templar
was quartered in Jerusalem
in part of the Temple Mount,
directly above
what were believed
to be the buried remains of King
Solomon's temple and stables.
There, it is believed that
they discovered holy relics
and scrolls.
These significantly
and permanently shifted
the trajectory of the
order and greatly increased
its importance.
The exact nature of what
they found remains a mystery.
But the actions of the Templars
in the immediate aftermath
of their discoveries
make a fascinating story,
which is brought to
light in numerous books
by the author and
historian Freddy Silva.
>> They already had the people
in place with which to set up
a framework with which they
could set up a secular state.
And their benefactor, who
was Bernard of Clairvaux,
the centerpiece of the
Templars, was the head
of the Cistercian order.
If you understand
where he came from,
he was also looking to create
a kingdom of conscience
in a part of Europe, something
that had not been corrupted
by the Catholic belief system.
He wanted an original
form of Christianity
to be founded on the
principles that were set up
in the days when Jesus
and his disciples
were around and yet
almost different to what
they were practicing, almost
like a Buddhist ideal.
So the Templars found themselves
in this unique opportunity
where they had a brand new
piece of real estate with which
to operate from
scratch and set out
their dogma in complete
freedom, away from the church.
>> Silva describes the Templars'
deliberate and focused creation
of a sovereign nation,
the kingdom of Portugal,
created in 1139.
He also cites documentation
and local stories
passed down through generations
in France, Italy, Spain,
Scotland, and Portugal itself.
This evidence supports the
claim that the Templars
sought to protect the bloodline
of Jesus and Mary Magdalene.
The Templars' ideal
nation was to be
one governed by the
descendants of this bloodline.
It would include
and welcome people
of all religious
and cultural beliefs
and of all social and
economic backgrounds.
>> They wanted to have a
sovereign nation where people
could come and
bring about harmony.
And it was the only
country in all of Europe
that this was happening.
>> Such theories correspond
with well-documented records
of the Templars protecting
Jews and those Christians that
the church considered
heretics, such as the Gnostics
and the Cathars.
It's a historical fact that many
members of these groups fleeing
the onslaught of
the Holy Inquisition
were given sanctuary
in Portugal.
The primary headquarters
of the Templars
was thought to be in France,
where grand master Jacques de
Molay and several
thousand other Templars
resided prior to their capture.
But Silva convincingly argues
that the Templars actually had
several strongholds in Europe.
At this time, King
Philip IV of France
desperately needed to
replenish his depleted coffers.
He had already rounded
up and murdered the Jews,
confiscating all
of their property.
But he was also in
great financial debt
to the Templars, a debt that
he wished to avoid paying.
On Friday the 13th, 1307, he
moved against the Templars,
arresting them and confiscating
all of their wealth and lands
in France.
The fact that many Templars
who escaped Philip's wrath
fled to Portugal, which had
also welcomed the Jews, Cathars,
and Gnostics, suggests that the
Templars held vast lands there,
as well.
It was possible that
the city of Tomar
became a major
stronghold for them.
But how many Templars
actually resided in Tomar?
And would they have been
able to gather a fleet
to travel by sea from
their port to Brazil?
[MUSIC PLAYING]
We know from history that the
Templars gave refuge to peoples
from all nationalities
and religious backgrounds,
such as the Jews,
Cathars, and Gnostics,
who were fleeing
persecution from the church.
>> You have to understand
that during the 1300s,
that the church dominated the
entire continent of Europe.
You couldn't do anything without
permission from the church.
And Portugal was a holdout.
Portugal was the
only country that
still was made up of Jews,
Cathars, Druids, Moors, Islam.
This was a threat to the church.
I mean, here we are in the
middle of the Inquisition
at this point, and the church
was hunting down heretics
all throughout Europe.
And we have this one
little country of Portugal
that the Templars
dominated, basically,
that the country of Portugal
wouldn't even exist today if it
hadn't been for the Templars.
>> We also know that the
Templars were rumored to have
discovered the bloodline
of Jesus and Mary Magdalene
and protected their descendants.
[VOCALIZING]
Silva says in his book that
"Portugal" can actually
be interpreted as
"port of the grail."
So how would he
define the meaning
of the grail in this context?
>> I was looking
at the king's seal.
And to all appearances,
the first clue
that nothing is really
out of the ordinary
is that your eye glances
over the king's seal,
and it says Portugal.
And you think,
OK, it's Portugal.
But if you're an
initiate of the mysteries
and you know how to hide
things in plain sight,
you basically look
at this a bit slower.
You look at the way that the
letters have been formulated
over this Templar cross.
And it literally
reads "portu-gral."
It's a suggestion that
somehow, the grail is involved
in Portuguese territory.
It's very subtle.
But to anyone who
knows the mysteries,
they know these subtleties,
and they pick up
on these little clues.
But to a person
who's deeply involved
in metaphor and
symbolism, you begin
to read the letters
as an anagram.
And if you're Portuguese,
it reads as a phrase.
And it says "por tu
o gral," and that
translates as "through
you, the grail," which
means there's something
about that territory,
that town in which Tomar
sits, the Templar stronghold,
that is associated with
some kind of grail quest,
some kind of understanding
of what the grail is about
and what it does to you.
Because the same phrase is
also found, of all places,
on the northeastern pillar
of Chartres Cathedral, where
there's a depiction
of the actual grail
and the Ark of the Covenant.
And it says right under there,
"through you, the grail."
And if we understand
and make the connection
between what the
Cistercians and the Templars
were doing in Chartres
Cathedral and what
they were doing in Tomar in
Portugal, there is an overlap.
And that is to do
with the mysteries.
And to understand
the mysteries is
to understand what the
grail really is about.
[CARS WHOOSHING]
>> While following the trail of
the Templars from Brazil back
to Portugal, Kathleen
visits the city of Tomar.
The city was founded by
the Templars themselves
and was their
headquarters in Portugal.
Dating back to the
early 12th century
and still standing
in Tomar today
are a Templar
castle and churches
dedicated to John the
Baptist and Mary Magdalene.
Here, many of the orders'
early grand masters
were laid to rest.
In Tomar, Kathleen is introduced
to Joao Fiandeiro, who
is a current Templar
and a researcher
and expert on Templar crosses.
He provides her with information
about the Templar's role
in founding Portugal
and their goal
of protecting the royal
bloodline of Jesus and Mary
Magdalene.
>> What was the Templars'
relationship with Mary
Magdalene?
Was there a secret or
anything that they may
have been trying to protect?
>> The Templar Knights were
very Marian in their worships.
They were worshipping Mary,
the mother, and, of course,
what it represents,
not just the mother
of Christ but the mother--
the mother of all of us.
Templar Knights has
mentor St. John Baptist.
Because for them, that's the
man that baptized Christ.
So that's the man that
started the Christianism.
For them, he's the one that
is the mentor of Christians.
But it's from the Mary, the
mother, that life comes.
And being that, as a ritual
for the Templar Knights,
and they use that in a
lot of their symbolism,
it gives us that clue that they
might be protecting something
more than just the physical
mother that we have
but the mother of the one
that was really the Christ.
And too, that bloodline
that might have existed,
probably the Templar Knights
have been their protectors,
and they had that knowledge
about Mary Magdalene.
>> But learning all of these
historical details leaves
Kathleen puzzled.
Having gone to the trouble
and hard work of establishing
Portugal as a nation founded
on their beliefs and goals,
why did the Templars flee?
And where did they go?
[MUSIC PLAYING]
Few written records
remain from this time.
Many were destroyed
for fear of reprisals
from the Catholic Church.
But research has unearthed
several documents
detailing Templar ownership
of vast lands in Portugal
and evidence of their
close connections
with the Portuguese
monarchy, both of which
made the country
relatively safe for them.
Silva's research has uncovered
evidence of the church
manipulating and influencing
almost all European monarchs
during this period.
He concludes, and Kathleen
agrees, that the Templars
probably recognized this fact.
They were realistic
enough to anticipate
that the tentacles of the
church would eventually
engulf Portugal, as well.
So they began to leave.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
Kathleen finds evidence that
some Templars made their way
to Scotland and, from Scotland,
with a small fleet of ships,
the Sinclair family ventured
out to North America
in search of land in
the area of Nova Scotia.
Establishing a
foothold there meant
that the Templars were beyond
the reach of the church,
free from its oppressive
and barbaric practices back
in Europe.
This excursion to Nova
Scotia was perhaps a template
that those members of the order
who had remained in Portugal
could follow.
And they needed to.
Increasing pressure
from the Catholic Church
led King Denis of Portugal to
officially disband the Templars
in his kingdom, where they were
renamed the Knights of Christ.
After the death of
King Denis in 1320,
the security that the Templars
enjoyed there began to wane.
Kathleen believes that it
was during this general time
period, perhaps in anticipation
of impending danger
and perhaps in response to
present threats in Portugal,
that the Templars
ventured to Brazil.
She believes that
it was their intent
to create yet again an
ideal sovereign nation.
This nation, like the Templar
outpost in Nova Scotia,
would exist outside the
reach of the church.
[CHORAL SINGING]
But how did the
Templars get to Brazil?
Two men think that
they may know.
Joáo Luiz Batista Ramos is
a Templar descendant himself
and owner of the Camelot
Pousada in Alto Paraíso.
Luis Salvi is author of
the book, [IN PORTUGUESE],,
"The Return of the Templars."
Both men have done extensive
research on the Templar
presence in Brazil, their
agenda in South America,
and its importance.
Their theory is that,
owing to the Templars'
possession of seafaring maps
of the ancient Phoenicians
and records of Venetian
boat-building techniques,
it's quite possible that
members of the order
could have left Portugal
for Brazil as early as 1290.
[GULLS CRYING]
By this time, the
Templars were known
to have a fleet of ships
capable of making the journey.
This theory interests
Kathleen, as it
offers a reasonable explanation
for how the Templars might
have breached the Old World
and the New World at this time.
>> The Templars were a
unique power at the time.
When they were persecuted,
they were welcomed
in the Iberian Peninsula.
Then, let's just
say that the axis
of gravity of the
European synarchy
was kind of relocated
to the Peninsula.
And then it began
all this research
to rescue the knowledge
of this information,
seeking to find new
commercial and nautical routes
to the Orient.
Because the Arabs had
closed the doors on us
by the end of the Crusades.
And then they began to rescue
those ancient legends--
what was there in the oceans,
what islands there were,
how to get to other continents.
And then came all those
things about Atlantis, things
about the Phoenicians.
And then navigation started.
And they were certainly
finding, secretly,
in the beginning, state secrets
about the first navigations,
up until things came to
light through Columbus,
when they had to admit that
they already knew Brazil.
They went there to
mark their territory.
Unfortunately, the story
we learned in school
is that they deviated
from their path to India.
That is not true.
The truth is that they
came here intentionally.
And they would say, ah, it
was the island of Veracruz.
They would say it was an
island not to call attention
from other powers of the time
like England, Holland, France,
and Spain.
And to not call this
kind of attention,
they divided Brazil in the
hereditary captaincies.
And after this, they named
it Veracruz, Land of the True
Cross, the Templar cross.
So in reality, the
ones who discovered
Brazil were the Templar
ships certainly,
and not by the Portuguese.
There was no money
from Portugal.
All was financed by the order.
The order knew
about many things.
They knew what Brazil
would represent
to the world in the future--
a new era.
Queen Santa Isabel from
Portugal, from Coimbra,
is buried in Coimbra,
completely preserved.
She was the wife
of Dom Dinis, who
welcomed the Templars, who
were running from France,
and is considered a saint
by the Catholic Church.
Till this day, there is a very
beautiful party in Coimbra
on every other year to pay
homage because of her miracles.
She is the patroness of Coimbra
and patroness of Portugal.
And if we are now
speaking Portuguese,
it's Queen Santa Isabel
we need to thank.
Few people know this.
A continental
country such as ours,
to have one single
language, it's inexistent.
You travel 200
kilometers in Europe,
you've already
crossed two countries
with different languages.
And talking about the
European community,
it was also an old
idea of the Templars'--
the first bank,
bill of exchange,
check, all this was
a Templar legacy.
And all this, too, was unknown.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> We can imagine that
before there was a road here,
there was probably
some type of path.
Maybe the Templars even
walked this path, you know,
700 years ago.
I like to put myself
in their shoes
and try to remember
what it might
have been like to have
lived here in 1307 or 1308,
when they came.
What was it like?
Was it a magical
land like it is now?
That hasn't changed, surrounded
by waterfalls and crystal
everywhere, beautiful quartz
crystal everywhere, minerals,
and beautiful people
that were here,
the natives that were here,
that they married into,
their families.
They started families
with the women.
You know, we just
have to imagine
what they would be doing.
They would be living
daily lives, you know--
surviving, hunting,
building homes.
Sooner or later, they would
have shed their uniforms
and adopted clothing
that was more
appropriate for this terrain.
They would have
developed skills that
were more appropriate for living
in this kind of an environment.
So there has to be some
things that they shed.
Where are those belt buckles
and the boots and whatever?
The boots would have
deteriorated, of course.
But they probably had guns
and whatever else they
had-- their swords,
their armor, the chain
mail that they wore
under their tunics.
All of those things would
have lasted the test of time.
So those are the kind
of things that we'll
be looking for, if families
have kept some of those things.
>> All of Kathleen's research
and detective work leads her
back to one woman,
Leonia Saraiva.
>> So let's see
what she has to say.
>> Yeah, right.
Yeah, she may know a great deal
of the history of the area.
It's a good chance
that she probably does,
if her family is from
this area originally.
[CONVERSING IN PORTUGUESE]
>> Leonia is the owner of the
land that shares a boundary
with the property where Kathleen
found the cave with the Templar
cross carving.
Saraiva's property is also
located smack in the middle
of the area where the Templars
are rumored to have created
their colony, in the triangular
area of Alto Paraíso, Moinho,
and Sáo Jorge in Brazil.
According to local
tradition, their descendants
intermingled with, and married
into, the local Native people
and are still scattered
across the area today.
Leonia's great, great, great
grandfather, Joaquim Rodrigues
Pereira, was a ship's captain.
He originally bought the land
that she now owns sometime
in the early 1800s.
He came searching for the gold
rumored to exist in the area.
As Leonia shows Kathleen
around her property,
she points out an old mill wheel
and a bronze ax, both of which
appear to be from the
medieval period in Europe.
She claims that
both were here when
her ancestor bought this land.
>> Here it is.
This is slave work.
Otherwise, how would
it be possible to open
a hole of this hard rock?
This is definitely slave work.
I will give you an idea.
This dome right over here
runs on top of this one.
Do you see the shape of it?
Here, the grains fall
in, and the stone
passes on top of the other
and grinds it into a powder--
this stone here.
But there was wood.
The [PORTUGUESE]
was used in the past
for grinding wheat,
rice, and corn so we
would have the corn powder.
But then, to compact
and clean that thing,
we use the [PORTUGUESE] Do you
know what a [PORTUGUESE] is?
It's a type of
[PORTUGUESE],, which
is kind of a hammer,
moved by the water.
Such a funny thing.
It had an axis with a
container on one end
where the water fills
up and lifts the hammer
on the other end.
After the container fills
up, it goes back down
and spills the water out.
That change of weight allows the
hammer to go back down again,
compacting everything.
It was built by
the Captain Moore.
He had slaves, and
they were the ones
that built the
[PORTUGUESE] in our town.
They lived there.
And here was their pathway.
They built it there because
there was a lot of water
to make the mill work.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> After leaving Brazil in 2015,
Kathleen's life is not only
filled with much
additional research,
she also encounters
some serious obstacles.
For instance, nine days
after she returns to the US,
Kathleen's home, art studio, and
several personal works of art
are destroyed in the Butte
Fire of Northern California.
Only six weeks later, she
is admitted to the hospital
and undergoes a
liver transplant,
following a four-year
battle with liver cancer.
These circumstances,
among others,
prevent her from returning
to Brazil for two more years.
After recuperating
from the surgery
and having satisfactorily
relocated, in 2017,
Kathleen sets out to
rediscover the cave in Brazil.
Unfortunately, her
efforts yield no results.
A huge fire has struck the
Alto Paraíso area that year.
The fire, encompassing
several thousand acres,
has scorched the land
where the cave is located.
Disappointed but
not discouraged,
Kathleen makes arrangements
with the caretaker of the land
to return the following year.
But while dining
with friends in town,
she is introduced to a film
director, Trajano Paiva,
who knows about her project.
Trajano offers to film the
rediscovery of the cave
the following year.
June 2018, Kathleen returns
once more to Alto Paraíso.
This place and its distinct
ambience has grown on her.
She is now quite
attached to its people,
their laid-back lifestyle,
and the natural beauty
of their region.
But there is something more.
The English translation of Alto
Paraíso is "high paradise."
[MAJESTIC MUSIC]
It is the multicultural,
multireligious,
and multilingual backgrounds
of the people of Alto Paraíso,
Sáo Jorge, and Moinho that
make this place so magical.
People from all corners of
the Earth who visit this area
find themselves returning
year after year.
Many choose to make it
their permanent home.
So Kathleen asks herself, isn't
this truly the Templars' dream
become reality?
Whether inspired by
their intention or not,
Alto Paraíso and its surrounding
communities are undeniably
composed of people with diverse
backgrounds and divergent
experiences who are nevertheless
living in harmony with each
other.
There can be no
doubt about that.
Kathleen and the film
director, Trajano Paiva,
procure permission to access the
land where the cave is located.
They gather up their
gear and set off
into the vast wilderness.
They go without a guide but with
a great sense of determination
to rediscover the cave.
However, this turns out to
be a rather difficult task.
The previous year's fire
has burned all the trails
and completely
changed the landscape,
making it almost
entirely unrecognizable.
The first day out,
Trajano and Kathleen
give up after
hours of searching.
They're tired, hungry,
and with no better
idea of where the cave is
than when they started out.
In fact, several more days
pass before they are again
granted access to the land.
But this time, they find
an old, rusted sign hidden
by brush that reads gruta--
"cave" in English.
So they at least have
a starting point.
The sign, and Kathleen's
memory of her 2015 visit,
give them a general sense
of where the cave should be.
Once again, Kathleen
and Trajano set out
with high hopes of
finding the cave.
Their first three attempts
lead to nothing but dead ends.
It is only on their last
chance to find the cave
that Kathleen's intuition
finally bears fruit.
Trajano, weighed down with
his heavy film equipment,
is ready to give up.
But Kathleen insists
on persevering.
She makes her way through
dangerously tall grass,
which hides not only deep
ruts and boulders but also
poisonous snakes and spiders.
And she finds the
vein of crystal
that she last saw in 2015.
>> It's about three
feet, four feet, deep--
wide, wide-- and probably about
four to five feet in height.
And it's solid crystal
all the way down.
There's a vein of it
that goes all the way
down this whole area.
Yeah, all this whole area.
I will show you a piece.
This is what it looks like.
We have a piece of it.
It's white crystal.
And this whole thing, this
whole wall, is all of crystal.
It's magnificent.
And we cross over it
before we get to the cave.
>> Now she knows that the
cave is only another mile
or so farther away.
But in which direction?
>> OK.
So the first time I came, we
crossed this crystal wall,
and then we went
down to the cave.
So I'm not sure if
it's this direction
or if we came in
from this direction.
I'm not sure.
We'll have to check both ways.
I'll have to see
both ways and see.
So a little bit more exploring
to do before we find the prize.
[LAUGHING]
We can walk the wall
and look this way
and look this way, too.
Walk the wall this way and
then walk the wall this way
and see which way
where we find the cave.
>> Following the vein
of quartz crystal,
first in one direction
and then the other,
she notices a knoll off
to the right below them.
The knoll has an odd, dark
area just in front of it.
Instinctively, Kathleen
feels that this is it.
She thinks that they may
have found the cave entrance.
But Trajano has doubts.
Perhaps what Kathleen sees
as the mouth of the cave
is only a shadow created
by the overhanging brush.
He worries about hiking downhill
with his heavy equipment
for what may be only
an optical illusion.
So while Trajano waits,
Kathleen heads down
to explore on her own.
The closer she comes,
the surer she is.
Within 100 yards or so of the
cave, she calls out to Trajano
and tells him to
bring the equipment.
He will soon see this
magnificent discovery
with his own eyes.
More importantly, he will
document it with his camera.
Moments later, Kathleen is
just 20 feet from the cave.
She can see the
edges of the opening
almost completely overgrown
with bushes and small trees.
The brush is her only
remaining obstacle now,
and she immediately
begins to clear it away.
Until there it is again.
>> Woo!
[LAUGHS]
OK, it's easier to walk in here.
Push down the bushes.
No one's been here
for a long time.
Yeah, there's the cross.
You see the cross?
>> The Templar cave, carved
out with nothing more than hand
tools, sometime
between 1292 and 1315.
And above it is the
distinctive Templar cross that
marks it as Templar property.
>> Yeah, I can see it.
>> Yeah, this is it.
This is the Templar cave.
Now, there's a Templar cross.
[PANTING]
Woo-hoo!
[LAUGHS]
The Templar cross
right here, the same
cross I saw in Domme,
France, in 1307.
There was 1307, dated, where
they kept the Templar knights
in Domme, France in the dungeon.
And they left graffiti the
same as this, the same tool
markings.
This was done by hand tools.
This was not done
by modern tools--
hand tools.
A Templar cross, a Templar cave.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> In your professional
opinion as a researcher
of the Templars, I'm going to
show you a picture of a cross
that we found in Brazil.
>> Wow.
I would say immediately
that it is a cross related
with the Templars.
There's no doubt it
has relations with it.
>> This strong evidence of the
Templars' presence here in Alto
Paraíso, Brazil inspires Dr.
Kathleen Ball to continue
to search the area for more
artifacts and to interview more
of the local people.
The information they
provide may help
her establish and track down
the Templar roots in this area.
Most of all, the
evidence motivates
Kathleen to keep
researching and keep
visiting the lands
of the Templars
to bring this mysterious
order out of the shadows
and into the hearts
and minds of all.
>> I'm going back to Brazil.
There is much more
to discover there.
This story is just not finished.
[MUSIC PLAYING]